The web resources on the Internet (e.g.websites, user reviews, news, blogs, social media networks, etc.) are gigantic sources of textual data. Besides, there is a wealth of textual content on the various archives of news articles, novels, books, legal documents, biomedical documents, scientific papers, etc. The textual content on the Internet and other archives grow exponentially on a daily basis. As a result, users consume a lot of time to find the information they are looking for. They cannot even read and comprehend all the textual content of search results. There are many repeated or unimportant portions of the resulting texts. Therefore, summarizing and condensing the text resources becomes urgent and much more important. Manual summarization is an expensive task and consumes a lot of time and effort. Practically, it is very difficult for humans to manually summarize this huge amount of textual data The Automatic Text Summarization (ATS) is the key solution to this ilemma. The main objective of an ATS system is to produce a summary that includes the main ideas in the input document in less space  and to keep repetition to a minimum. The ATS systems help the users to get the main points of the original document without the need to read the entire document. The users will benefit from the automatically produced summaries and they will save a lot of time and effort.In , Maybury defined the automated summary as follows: ''An effective summary distills the most important information from a source (or sources) to produce an abridged version of the original information for a particular user(s) and task(s)". In , Radev et al. also defined the summary as follows: ''A summary can be loosely defined as a text that is produced from one or more texts, that conveys important information in the original text(s), and that is no longer than half of the original text(s) and usually significantly less than that. Text here is used rather loosely and can refer to speech, multimedia documents, hypertext, etc.". The produced summary should be shorter in length than the input text and include the most important information in the input text. ATS systems can be classified as single-document or multidocument summarization systems. The former produces the summary from a single document while the latter generates the summary from a cluster of documents. ATS systems are designed by applying one of the text summarization approaches: extractive, abstractive, or hybrid. The extractive approach selects the most important sentences from the input text and uses them to generate the summary. The abstractive approach represents the input text in an intermediate form then generates the summary with words and sentences that differ from the original text sentences. The hybrid approach combines both the extractive and abstractive approaches. The different classifications for ATS systems are defined in Section 2. The general architecture of an ATS system; as shown in; consists of the following tasks: 1. Pre-Processing: producing a structured representation of the original text using many linguistic techniques like sentences segmentation, words tokenization, removal of stop-words, part-of-speech tagging, stemming, etc. 2. Processing: using one of the text summarization approaches by applying a technique or more to convert the input document(s) to the summary. Section 3 defines the different ATS approaches and Section 4 explores the different techniques and building blocks to implement an ATS system. 3. Post-Processing: solving some problems in the generated summary sentences like anaphora resolution and reordering the selected sentences before generating the final summary. ATS is one of the most challenging tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) in general. ATS research began as early as 1958 with Luhn's work that automatically excerpts abstracts of magazine articles and technical papers. ATS poses many challenges to the research community like: 1) identification of the most informative segments in the input text to be included in the generated summary , 2) summarization of long single documents such as books, 3) summarization of multi-documents, 4) evaluation of the computer-generated summary without the need for the human-produced summary to be compared with, and 5) generation of an abstractive summary similar to a human-produced summary. Researchers still dream of an accurate ATS system to produce a summary that 1) covers all the main topics in the input text, 2) does not include redundant or repeated data, and 3) is readable and cohesive to the users. Since the beginning of ATS research in the late 1950s, they have been trying and are still working to improve techniques and methods for generating summaries so that the computer-generated summaries can match with the human-made summaries. Many surveys have been recently published about ATS systems and methodologies. Most surveys focus on techniques and methods of extractive summarization like because the abstractive summarization needs extensive NLP. In define the common statistical features and some extractive methods.In , Kumar and Sharma provide a survey about the extractive ATS systems that apply fuzzy logic methods. In,  provide a survey on how the swarm intelligence optimization techniques are applied for ATS. They aim to motivate researchers to use swarm intelligence optimization for ATS especially for short text summarization. provide a survey about extractive deep-learning-based text summarization. Some surveys focus on abstractive summarization like , for different abstractive methods for abstractive neuralnetwork-based methods.Some surveys focus on a domainspecific summarization like for legal documents summarization, for comparing extractive algorithms used in the microblogs summarization, and for abstractive deep-learning-based methods and challenges of meeting summarization. Some surveys like  provide a review about some abstractive and extractive methods. A survey about the summarization evaluation methods is presented in. Most of the state-of-the-art surveys tackle a subset of the ATS aspects like focusing on one approach (e.g. extractive summarization), one method for a specific approach (e.g. extractive fuzzy logic method), one specific-domain ATS systems (e.g. legal documents summarization), etc. Besides,  highlights that different ATS algorithms produce different summaries from the same input texts so it is very promising to combine outputs from multiple ATS algorithms to produce better summaries. Also, conclude that it is recommended to benefit from the advantages of both extractive and abstractive approaches by proposing hybrid ATS systems. Therefore, the main motivation for this work is to provide a comprehensive survey about the various ATS aspects in order to help researchers enhance computergenerated summaries potentially by combining different approaches and/or methods. The main contributions of this research include:     Illustrating the classifications of the ATS systems and explaining the different ATS applications provided with examples of ATS systems proposed in the literature for each application.  Providing a systematic review about the ATS approaches: extractive, abstractive, and hybrid. Each approach is applied using several methods in the literature. This survey provides: 1) the general architecture, advantages, and disadvantages of each approach and 2) the methods of each approach along with the advantages, disadvantages, and examples of ATS systems for each method. A conclusion about the state-of-the-art research recommendations for each approach is provided at the end of the approach subsection in Section3. Providing an overview about the various components and techniques that are used to design and implement the ATS systems. The survey illustrates: 1) the text summarization operations inspired from the analysis of the human experts' operations, 2) the widely-used statistical and linguistic features that identify the important words and sentences, and 3) the text summarization building blocks. The building blocks include: 1) the common text representation models, 2) the linguistic analysis and processing techniques, and 3) the soft computing techniques (e.g. machine learning, optimization algorithms, and fuzzy logic). Providing an overview about the standard datasets besides the manual evaluation criteria and automatic evaluation tools for the computer-generated summaries. Providing a listing and categorization of the future research directions for the research community based on the existing ATS systems limitations and challenges. The structure of this paper mirrors its main contributions: Section 2 illustrates the various classifications of ATS systems and the ATS applications. Section 3 introduces ATS approaches and explores the different methods proposed in the literature for each approach. Section 4 highlights the techniques and building blocks that are used to implement ATS systems, while Section 5 explores the benchmarking datasets and ATS evaluation methods. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and provides future directions for ATS research.