ATS systems are designed by applying one of the text summarization approaches: extractive, abstractive, or hybrid.
The extractive approach selects the most important sentences from the input text and uses them to generate the summary.       
2. Processing: using one of the text summarization approaches by applying a technique or more to convert the input document(s) to the summary.
ATS poses many challenges to the research community like: 1) identification of the most informative segments in the input text to be included in the generated summary , 2) summarization of long single documents such as books, 3) summarization of multi-documents, 4) evaluation of the computer-generated summary without the need for the human-produced summary to be compared with, and 5) generation of an abstractive summary similar to a human-produced summary.
Researchers still dream of an accurate ATS system to produce a summary that 1) covers all the main topics in the input text, 2) does not include redundant or repeated data, and 3) is readable and cohesive to the users.
In define the common statistical features and some extractive methods.In , Kumar and Sharma provide a survey about the extractive ATS systems that apply fuzzy logic methods.
Most of the state-of-the-art surveys tackle a subset of the ATS aspects like focusing on one approach (e.g. extractive summarization), one method for a specific approach (e.g. extractive fuzzy logic method), one specific-domain ATS systems (e.g. legal 
documents summarization), etc.
Besides,  highlights that different ATS algorithms produce different summaries from the same input texts so it is very promising to combine outputs from multiple ATS algorithms to produce better summaries.
Also, conclude that it is recommended to benefit from the advantages of both extractive and abstractive approaches by proposing hybrid ATS systems.
Therefore, the main motivation for this work is to provide a comprehensive survey about the various ATS aspects in order to help researchers enhance computergenerated summaries potentially by combining different approaches and/or methods.
Providing a systematic review about the ATS approaches: extractive, abstractive, and hybrid.
This survey provides: 1) the general architecture, advantages, and disadvantages of each approach and 2) the methods of each approach along with the advantages, disadvantages, and examples of ATS systems for each method.

